docs: how-arbitrum-works-reorg (#1866)
OffchainLabs/arbitrum-docs: arbitrum-docs/how-arbitrum-works/05-separating-execution-from-proving.mdx

---
title: Separating Execution from Proving
description: 'Learn the fundamentals of Arbitrum Rollup protocol.'
author: pete-vielhaber
sme: TucksonDev
user_story: As a current or prospective Arbitrum user, I need to learn more about the Arbitrum Rollup protocol.
content_type: get-started
---

> One of the challenges in designing a practical rollup system is the tension between wanting the system to perform well in ordinary execution, versus being able to reliably prove the results of execution. Nitro resolves this tension by using the same source code for both execution and proving, but compiling it to different targets for the two cases.
> 
> When compiling the Nitro node software for _execution_, the ordinary Go compiler is used, producing native code for the target architecture, which of course will be different for different node deployments. (The node software is distributed in source code form, and as a Docker image containing a compiled binary.)
> 
> Separately, for _proving_, the portion of the code that is the State Transition Function is compiled by the Go compiler to WebAssembly (wasm), which is a typed, portable machine code format. The wasm code then goes through a simple transformation into a format we call WAVM, which is detailed below. If there is a dispute about the correct result of computing the STF, it is resolved with reference to the WAVM code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the challenges in designing a practical Rollup system is the tension between wanting the system to perform well in ordinary execution versus being able to reliably prove the results of execution. Nitro resolves this tension by using the same source code for both execution and proving, but compiling it to different targets for the two cases.

When compiling the Nitro node software for _execution_, the ordinary Go compiler is used, producing native code for the target architecture, which of course will be different for different node deployments. (The node software is distributed in source code form and as a Docker image containing a compiled binary.)

Separately, for _proving_, the portion of the code that is the State Transition Function is compiled by the Go compiler to WebAssembly (wasm), which is a typed, portable machine code format. The wasm code then goes through a simple transformation into a format we call WAVM, which is detailed below. If there is a dispute about the correct result of computing the STF, it is resolved with reference to the WAVM code.
```

## WAVM

> The wasm format has many features that make it a good vehicle for fraud proofs---it is portable, structured, well-specified, and has reasonably good tools and support---but it needs a few modifications to do the job completely. Nitro uses a slightly modified version of wasm, which we call WAVM. A simple transformation stage turns the wasm code produced by the Go compiler into WAVM code suitable for proving.
> 
> WAVM differs from wasm in three main ways. First, WAVM removes some features of wasm that are not generated by the Go compiler; the transformation phase verifies that these features are not present.
> 
> Second, WAVM restricts a few features of wasm. For example, WAVM does not contain floating-point instructions, so the transformer replaces floating-point instructions with calls to the Berkeley SoftFloat library. (We use software floating-point to reduce the risk of floating-point incompatibilities between architectures. The core Nitro functions never use floating-point, but the Go runtime does use some floating-point operations.) WAVM does not contain nested control flow, so the transformer flattens control flow constructs, turning control flow instructions into jumps. Some wasm instructions take a variable amount of time to execute, which we avoid in WAVM by transforming them into constructs using fixed cost instructions. These transformations simplify proving.
> 
> Third, WAVM adds a few opcodes to enable interaction with the blockchain environment. For example, new instructions allow the WAVM code to read and write the chain's global state, to get the next message from the chain's inbox, or to signal a successful end to executing the State Transition Function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Wasm format has many features that make it a good vehicle for fraud proofs—it is portable, structured, well-specified, and has reasonably good tools and support. However, it needs a few modifications to do the job completely. Nitro uses a slightly modified version of Wasm, which we call WAVM. A simple transformation stage turns the Wasm code produced by the Go compiler into WAVM code suitable for proving.

WAVM differs from wasm in three main ways. First, WAVM removes some wasm features that the Go compiler does not generate; the transformation phase verifies that these features are not present.

Second, WAVM restricts a few features of wasm. For example, WAVM does not contain floating-point instructions, so the transformer replaces floating-point instructions with calls to the Berkeley SoftFloat library. (We use software floating-point to reduce the risk of floating-point incompatibilities between architectures. The core Nitro functions never use floating-point, but the Go runtime does use some floating-point operations.) WAVM does not contain nested control flow, so the transformer flattens control flow constructs, turning control flow instructions into jumps. Some wasm instructions take a variable amount of time to execute, which we avoid in WAVM by transforming them into constructs using fixed-cost instructions. These transformations simplify proving.

Third, WAVM adds a few opcodes to enable interaction with the blockchain environment. For example, new instructions allow the WAVM code to read and write the chain's global state, to get the next message from the chain's inbox, or to signal a successful end to execute the State Transition Function.
```
